These scripts were written by me, Mackenzie Noon (mackenzie dot noon at yale dot edu) as part of upcoming publication (CITATION). You can contact me with any questions.

# Purpose

The goal of this analysis is to .... 

# Preliminary notes / warnings. 

Manual checks
- This analysis uses many genomic data formats, which inconsistently use 0 and 1 based coordinates. In all nontrivial integrations of multiple formats, manual verification is performed.
- Manual, genome-browser verification of several steps of filtering procedure is included in a few "manual_verification" directories, to avoid any off-by-one errors or similar.

Misc.
- Intermediate steps do NOT produce correctly formatted VCF files, but rather keep all data in a simple tsv. 
- Encoding note: Sometimes presence of variants within a bin is stored in a one-hot fashion : multiple true/false columns, one for each bin. This is not generally desirable, so I convert away with "find_true_column" other times, this is desirable as it is not actually one hot, but multi-hot. Such as presence in genomic region (i.e. some variants might be both in a promoter like sequence & some other category)
- Variants present on non-autosomes are not carried through the analysis. 

# Steps

## 0. merge 

- executes `bedtools merge` to combine gnomad variants annotated with Malinois predictions as described in (METHODS) (`data/Malinois/gnomAD_variants/`) with variants annotated with a subset of gnomad annotations (`/gpfs/gibbs/pi/reilly/VariantEffects/data/gnomAD/gnomAD_genomes_v3.1.2/`), as both sets of annotations are useful for subsequent steps. 

## 1.0.format_zoonomia_phylop

Pre-processes phylo P scores retrieved from (ZOONOMIA CITE) into a format usable by `bcftools annotate`.

## 2.0.annotate

Removes variants which do **not** meet one or more of the following criteria:
- Variant has non-null AF, AC, AN values
    - (See section "Gnomad" below, or the gnomad website for an explanation of these abbriviations.)
- VAriant has a non-null PHRED score.
- Variant AN>=76156
    - (See aforementioned "Gnomad" section)
- Has a non-null CADD score
    - (See section "CADD" below).
- Passes all of gnomad's own filters. 

Annotates all variants with
- Which (if any) genomic regions they fall into ("genomic regions" here are retrieved from Encode, see Encode below) in a multi-hot format.
- PhyloP scores retrieved from (ZOONOMIA CITE) and formatted in the previous step.

Adds several columns for donwstream use, computed from existing columns:
- Mean malinois reference activity and mean malinois skew
- MAF : Minor Allele Frequency
    - (See aforementioned "Gnomad" section)
- Rarity codes (simply called "category") and based on AC and MAF.


Note on rarity code `MAF_OR_AC_IS_ZERO` : all variants bearing this code are filtered later steps. 

## 2.2.add_roulette

Adds roulette mutation rate from (ROULETTE CITE). 

## 2.3.add_transposons

Annotates all variants with a boolean value that indicates whether they are in a repetitive element or not. 

## 2.5.filter

Removes...

## 3.0.pleio_and_filter

Computes emVar status and "pleiotropy" (how many cell types, of the three predicted by malinois, is the variant predicted to be an emVar in). 

## intuition
This step takes the output of "2.3.add_transposons" but its own output is not used in any subsequent steps. 

## helper


# How to reproduce 

- In this directory, a yml file is provided which should allow you to make a conda environment that will facilitate recapitulation of the results.
- You can see "conda activate mcn_varef" in the batch files used to submit the relevant 
- A few shell scripts use specific versions of SAMtools & BEDtools, as documented in ...
- Worflow also includes some shell code, and so uses awk, wc, other similar utilities. 
- These scripts uses file generated by other analysis...
    - Uses gnomad VCF annotated with malinois activity predictions ...
    - gnomad from ...
    - malinous activity predictions produced in ...
    - The filtering step used masking produced in ...
  



# Bibliography and helpful excerpts

(The excerpts below help explain some abbriviations used by the various imported data). 


# Gnomad

(from tooltips on gnomad website)

AC : Allele Count : "Alternate allele count in high-quality genotypes"
AN : Allele Number : "Total high quality genotypes"
AF : Allele Frequency : "Alternate Allele Frequency in high quality genotypes"

AF=AC/AN

I define : MAF (minor allele frequency) = min(AF,1-AF)

gnomad filters 1) filter = pass, 2) maf != 0, 3) AN >= 76,156
- 76,156 is [the number of high-quality genomes in 3.1](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/news/2020-10-gnomad-v3-1/)
- Therefore, if a site were called in all individuals it would be 76,156\*2 . Gnomad sometimes issues the following warning

> Warning this variant is covered in fewer than 50% of individuals in gnomAD v3.1.2 genomes. This may indicate a low-quality site.

Example : [rs113653250](https://gnomad.broadinstitute.org/variant/1-434284-T-G?dataset=gnomad_r3)



## CADD

>To simplify interpretation in some contexts, we also defined phred-like scores (scaled C  scores) on the basis of the rank of the C score of each variant relative  to all 8.6 billion possible SNVs, ranging from 1 to 99 (Supplementary  Note). For example, substitutions with the highest 10% (10−1) of all  scores—that is, those least likely to be observed human alleles under  our model—were assigned values of 10 or greater (‘≥C10’), whereas  variants  in  the  highest  1%  (10^−2),  0.1%  (10^−3),  etc.  were  assigned  scores ‘≥C20’, ‘≥C30’, etc

(A general framework for estimating the relative pathogenicity of human genetic variants, nature genetics, 2014)

## PhyloP


## ensembl VEP


## Encode
https://screen.encodeproject.org/

>1. cCREs with promoter-like signatures (cCRE-PLS) fall within 200 bp (center to center) of an annotated GENCODE TSS and have high DNase and H3K4me3 signals (evaluated as DNase and H3K4me3 max-Z scores, defined as the maximal DNase or H3K4me3 Z scores across all biosamples with data; see Methods).
>2. cCREs with enhancer-like signatures (cCRE-ELS) have high DNase and H3K27ac max-Z scores and must additionally have a low H3K4me3 max-Z score if they are within 200 bp of an annotated TSS. The subset of cCREs-ELS within 2 kb of a TSS is denoted proximal (cCRE-pELS), while the remaining subset is denoted distal (cCRE-dELS).
>3. DNase-H3K4me3 cCREs have high H3K4me3 max-Z scores but low H3K27ac max-Z scores and do not fall within 200 bp of a TSS.
>4. CTCF-only cCREs have high DNase and CTCF max-Z scores and low H3K4me3 and H3K27ac max-Z scores. 

## Other Citations

Tange, O. (2021, March 22). GNU Parallel 20210322 ('2002-01-06').
  Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4628277


# finalization tasks
- [ ] finish writing docs
- [ ] Re-export final conda YML
- [ ] convert `malinois_vs_phylop=malinois_vs_phylop.rename(columns={i:i.replace('^', ',').replace('&','.') for i in malinois_vs_phylop.columns})` to function call in graphing settings file
- [ ] modify all graphs to look nice & export to svg or something
- [ ] move NN E4L9NdjPku1yFLxlZoJtXQ6TaMbewMye to better location
- [ ] move NN BL2jL5SIMor1yx6B21DpQ1jm4oiF82tt to better location
- [ ] If you send a copy of your published article to tange@gnu.org, it will be mentioned in the release notes of next version of GNU Parallel.
- [ ] add better references for files Dr. Rong gave me (add_tf.ipynb et al.)
